OVERVIEW
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leiserchess contains the following sub directories:

tester:
* An autotesting framework for Leiserchess developed by Don Dailey, although the
  framework supports any two-player game engine that support the UCI (universal
  chess interface) protocol.
* Again, you don't need to understand any of the codebase. You just need to use
  it.
* The autotester plays multiple player engines against each other according to the
  input configuration file given, and produces a PGN file (*.pgn) that is a
  recording of the game plays.
* You will find detailed instructions later under EVALUATE PLAYERS.

BayesElo:
* This is a software developed by Rémi Coulom to estimate Elo ratings.
  (https://remi.coulom.free.fr/Bayesian-Elo/) (The Elo rating system is a method
  for calculating the relative skill levels of players in two-player games.)
* For the purpose of this project, you only need to familiarize yourself with
  the use of this tool, but not actually understand any of the code base.
* BayesElo takes a PGN file (*.pgn), which is essentially a recording of game
  plays, and produces a rating for the players based on the PGN file. The PGN
  file will be generated by our autotester. You will find detailed instructions
  on how to use BayesElo and autotester later in this README, under EVALUATE
  PLAYERS.

player:
* The code for the game engine that you will be improving.
* There is a README in the directory that orients you to the codebase and gives
  a high-level overview of what each of the component does.
* We have provided a basic Makefile. You can type 'make' to compile the program.
  Upon compilation, a binary 'leiserchess' will be produced.

tests:
* A directory for you to store your configuration files for the autotester, so
  you can be organized.
* Right now, there is only on configuration file in the directory, namely
  basic.txt. You can model after those and build your own configuration files.
* Note that when you run the autotester, the PGN file produced will go into this
  directory as well.

webgui:
* The codebase of a web GUI for playing Leiserchess, so you can play with your
  classmate or against the player bot you build. Or even better, have your
  parent play with the bot you built. :-)
* Again, this is a tool for you to use, and you don't need to understand the 
  codebase to do well in this project.  Of course, if you are so inclined, 
  we welcome you to hack the web interface as well and contribute to the 
  codebase.

EVALUATE PLAYERS
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Once you start modifying the player code, you will want to check and make sure
that your modification is indeed an improvement, and this is where the
autotester comes into play. We recommend that you set up your Makefile so that
you can easily compile different versions of the players easily (with different
binary names). Once you have your player binaries, you can evaluate your changes
by playing the newer player binary against the older one using the autotester
framework. Be sure that you are not running anything else computationally
intensive when running the autotester for accurate results. The autotester also
acts as a referee, ensuring that both engines are making valid moves.

The autotester takes in a configuration file, specifying the parameter for
running the autotester. Detailed instructions for writing a configuration file
are in tester/README. We have provided a basic configuration file for you, in
tests/basic.txt.

DEBUGGING
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
When you run the leiserchess binary directly without the web GUI, leiserchess
launches into an "infinite" loop, accepting commands based on the UCI
specification. Check the document 'engine-interface.txt' for detailed
descriptions of what's accepted. You can also type 'help' to see possible
commands supported by the leiserchess UCI. The UCI interface is purely text
based, so you can debug your player program easily using a terminal. Anything
you print in the player code base gets printed out to the terminal window in
which you run leiserchess.

NOTE: You should rename the player from 'leiserchess' to something else (both
the binary and what's printed by the 'uci' command) once you start modifying the
player to help you keep track of different versions of your bot.

OPENING BOOK
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The opening book is auto-generated by the scripts generate-openings.sh in 
openings/{white,black}.  To run the scripts, set num_ply to the desired search
depth and set read_counter and write_counter to 0.  (These are for resuming from
incomplete earlier searches.)  The logic of the program is that for any given
opening, it will compute all opponent responses (at depth 5-7 ply, with various
different trials to survey possible responses) and then compute the best response
to each (currently at depth 7 ply).  The search depth can be adjusted within
generate-openings.sh to be 5-8; for longer depths, the files search-\*.txt also
need to be adjusted.  When this program completes, there will be many (typically
hundreds) of files opening-\*.txt in white and black with the various opening
sequences to be combined into the book.

After generating books to a given depth for both white and black (which are
required to be within 1 ply of each other), one can then run the script
create-book.sh in openings to combine all the individual opening sequences
into a single lookup table, lookup.h.  The auto-generated file is poorly
formatted, but since it's auto-generated it's not intended to be human-read.
Make sure that USE_OB is set to 1 in options.h during production runs and 
playtesting but set to 0 during correctness testing or while running perf.
