# Source - C to Assembly
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wt7a5BOztuM

# Notes
We will learn about LLVM IR into which C is translated, and then see how LLVM IR goes into Assembly. LLVM IR is an intermediate representation used by LLVM.

Usually things are compiled to LLVM, then LLVM is optimized a lot, then that is turned into x86 which may or may not be optimized again. LLVMIR is probably good because of portability, readability, etcetera...

To get LLVMIR do -S -emit-llvm. To get just the x86 you can use -S.

LLVMIR is nice because, as you'll see, there are no implicit RFLAGS or condition codes or other wierd thingies.

## LLVM IR Primer
LLVM IR has infinite "registers" which are like C variables. It however has a simple instruction format in the structure "destination = opcode sources." Control flow is implemented using conditional and unconditional branches. It also has functions.

Registers are % followed by name like %0, %1, %2, ... Register names are local to every LLVM IR function.

Types: i int, i1 => 1 bit, i64 => 64 bit. You can have type "label" too which is for a basic block. Basic blocks combine simple instructions whose code execution is always sequential (no jump instructions or jump targets between them).

Basic blocks can only start operation by the first instruction, and can only end operation by the last operation.

The instructions and basic blocks are named usually either with a useful name or with the integers ascending (so if you see values skipped in the register names it's because the blocks probably have those as their labels). Also note that the parameters of a function usually have the names %0, %1, ... up until their length - 1. This can be implicit so keep it in mind.

Functions are defined with "define" and their return type followed by @the_name and a parameter list of types.

There are also array types and vector types. Array types are in brackets [] and vector types are in wakas <>.

You might see things like "noalias" which means that two pointers' pointed to arrays will not overlap (i.e. restrict in C). There is also "tail," "nsw" and other things which I'm not sure what they are.

The return instruction is ret. You can also do call.

getelempntr gets the address of a thing. Integer compare is icmp. Review the instructions later. Basically it declares its output type, the input type, then it adds the indices at the end.

Phi is to keep the special SSA.

Recall there are pointers using C syntax.

Every instruction sets its output to a register that is set ONLY ONCE.

### Loops, conditionals
Branches are with br and the first thing is the condition, the second the place to go if true, and the second is the place to go otherwise.

Loops usually have phi at the top (i.e. imagine that you are incrementing an index; then you need to choose whether to pick the starter value or the incremented value).

### Attributes
"nsw" and other things like that are attributes.

Alignment is clear (memory address). Const goes to readonly, restrict goes to noalias. Nocapture? They don't tell us about the others; it's potentially worth reading the docs.

## Important for LLVMIR: SSA-Form
SSA stands for Static Single Assignment.

Basically, sometimes you'll get a diamond pattern and you want to select across many things. Then you use phi to select the value depending on which block you came from. It's gonna be a list for all the elements in the merge (not like phi tree)

## Misc
Stack, heap, BSS, data, text. Text is code. Bss is initialized to zero. Data is mostly static data.

Assembly has assembler directives. These are the things the the dots infront of it. This is used to organize the assembly file (i.e. what goes in the code segment? what goes in the bss segment? etc...). The assembler basically converts all this into machine code. There is also .globl for global functions (i.e. you can call it from elsewhere).

Recall the basics of the calling convention. There is a base pointer pointing the top of the current stack frame. The stack pointer points to the end of the frame. The frame stores all the temp stuff for the current function.

The stack grows down! Heap grows up.

%rip is the instruction pointer, it gets put in the stack so that the function can jump back to its caller (i.e. return address).

In LLVMIR call pushes to the stack, while ret undos what call did so that the caller can continue as if nothing had happened.

Who's responsible for preserving the register state across a call? Can be callee or caller. Different registers are using different strategies. The callee saved registers are %rbx, %rbp, and %r12-%r15. The ohers are caller saved we think. These tend to mean things. You can read the docs (i.e. "arguments" registers, etc...)

A's base pointer, B's local vars, args from B to C, B's return address, B's base pointer, ...

Get comfortable reading x86 and LLVMIR!